JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A
bestselling novelist
takes on war crimes.
Jeffrey Brown has our
latest addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2004,
400 people were rounded
up from their homes in
a village in Bosnia,
and buried alive in
an old coal mine.
But did this mass
killing really happen?
And, if so, who were
the perpetrators?
Those questions must be decided
at the International Criminal
Court in the Netherlands.
It's the setting for a new legal
thriller titled "Testimony"
and a new setting for acclaimed
author Scott Turow, the attorney
and writer whose work has sold
more than 30 million copies
since his debut novel,
"Presumed Innocent."
I'm not going to name all the
other bestsellers, Scott, but
it's nice to talk to you here.
SCOTT TUROW, Author,
"Testimony": Jeff, it's
nice to talk to you.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have
left behind the fictional
Kindle County, the
setting that many of us
are familiar with, that place
that's sort of familiar,
for a much broader palette.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why?
SCOTT TUROW: You know, I
just sort of accumulated
a writer's bucket list,
and one of the things,
years ago, that I decided I
would write about at some point
is the International Criminal
Court and The Hague,
just because I had never
read anything set there.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you started
with the idea of the court.
SCOTT TUROW: I did, for sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Something
intrigued you about
those kinds of trials?
SCOTT TUROW: I had been in The
Hague in the year 2000, and
had found myself at a party
surrounded by a bunch
of American lawyers
who were saying, you
have got to write about
this place.
And unlike most times when
people have ideas about Aunt
Tilly's watch or their divorce,
this sounded like it
would actually make an
interesting setting.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have
the legal background,
and you're an attorney.
How much research goes
into all of these -- the
stories that you write?
SCOTT TUROW: A lot.
I'm a year off my usual
cycle, because I went to
the Netherlands twice.
I went to Bosnia once.
I had a lot to learn about
first the court, even more to
learn about the Roma people,
and, of course, the Bosnian
conflict, about which I
was inexcusably ignorant.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this
is set in the aftermath
of the Bosnian War.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's
about a group of Roma,
often known as gypsies...
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... who
are still living there...
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: ...
but resettled there.
SCOTT TUROW: Yes.
Resettled in the
fictional world, resettled
after the Bosnian War,
driven out of Kosovo,
and have chosen to live right
near the American NATO bases
in Bosnia, which were there for
a decade after the war to
sort of keep the peace.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you
have this big story.
You have this history.
But the way in, as always,
is a particular character.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: In this case,
a lawyer from Kindle County.
SCOTT TUROW: From Kindle County.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SCOTT TUROW: The former U.S.
attorney in Kindle County.
JEFFREY BROWN: A very successful
man, who - - but is unfulfilled.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
Thrown his life up for grabs,
says that he has never felt
fully at home with himself.
And that helps explain why
he'd be willing to leave the
United States to work overseas.
JEFFREY BROWN: And is that
the way in for you, really?
SCOTT TUROW: What interested
me was when I found that the
United States Congress had
passed a law called the U.S.
Service-Members Protection Act,
which says that the president
has authority to forcibly
rescue anybody -- any
American serviceman charged
before the International
Criminal Court.
So, of course, the novelist
says, ah, good, conflict.
And so the idea of an American
prosecutor investigating,
among other suspects, American
service members was
immediately interesting.
JEFFREY BROWN: We can't go into
all the details of this plot
here, but, I mean, it's fair
to say that the book continues
what I think I can call your
own complicated relationship
to the law?
SCOTT TUROW: Yes, I think so.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, as a
kind of a both noble calling,
but also the -- what's the
word, a tawdriness, in
some ways of the law.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
There cannot be any greater
challenge to the law than
trying to adjudicate mass crimes
like war crimes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
I keep thinking, in your work
and in this one, that most of
us look at the legal system
as a way to get at the truth.
Do you think of it as that,
or as a way to get at a truth,
or what's going on there,
and what is it that
helps translates for
you as a novelist?
SCOTT TUROW: Well, you know,
I really think of the trial
of a lawsuit as an exercise in
history.
And people are offering
competing visions of what
happened in the past.
And the justice system
is willing to accept
either of those competing
visions and to impose
consequences as a result.
When you think of it that way,
it's a little bit startling,
because we want to believe
that there is one truth and,
therefore, one justice, whereas,
if you have practiced law
as long as I have, you realize
that there is actually a
range of acceptable outcomes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Of course, truth these days
is a kind of fraught concept.
SCOTT TUROW: Yes, it's...
JEFFREY BROWN: But it always
has been -- it sounds like
it always has been for you.
SCOTT TUROW: Well, it
is in the courtroom.
And it was frustrating
for me as a prosecutor.
When I wrote "Presumed Innocent"
originally, I didn't say
who had committed the crime.
And I had a long heart-to-heart
with myself about the
purpose of the mystery.
And one thing the mystery does
is deliver to us a certainty
that life and the courtroom
very often can't.
JEFFREY BROWN: Has
that continued?
Because I actually saw an
interview where you said, "I'm
a big believer in the fact
that all authors really
write only one book."
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
I think that's true.
And the older I get, the
more I'm trying to figure
out what the book is and why.
I know that, in a
book like "Testimony,"
issues like identity are
enormously important.
No character is fully at home.
And I have a hard time isolating
what it is in myself that
makes me so fascinated with
that theme, because I
came from a normal upper
middle-class family.
And yet, as I look back at my
books, the uses of power, issues
of identity, they have -- it's
recurrent.
It happens again and again.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, a lot of
people continue to read your one
book in its many forms, right?
(LAUGHTER)
SCOTT TUROW: Fortunately for me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Good for you.
SCOTT TUROW: I'm
grateful to all of them.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new
one is "Testimony."
Scott Turow, nice
to talk to you.
Thank you.
SCOTT TUROW: Jeff, it's
good to talk to you, too.